- One of the best parts
about being a software developer
is that you'll frequently get the opportunity
to step outside your formal job description.
These experiences can help grow your technical,
communication and leadership skills
by exposing you to new areas and new people.
So, let's talk out some common situations
that might create the opportunity
for you to step up and stand out.
In every team and organization,
there will be some churn where people leave their team
for a new position.
It can take a while to backfill a position.
So, until someone new is brought on board,
this period can be an opportunity for you
to fill a need for your team
and to test drive a different role
where you'll gain additional experience.
So, let's say that Jane,
who always took the lead on data modeling,
gets promoted to a new position.
You might approach your team lead
about stepping up to lead the database design
that Jane was working on for that new service
your team is building.
Just make sure you're confident
you can take on and complete what you propose.
If you can explain to your team lead
a bit about your plan to take on the extra work
and have a strong track record,
they'll probably appreciate your offer
to solve part of their new staffing problem.
If you do well with the new task,
you might even find that it becomes a part of your new role.
Another situation where you can step outside your swim lane,
is when nobody is familiar with a new technology
the team needs to leverage.
Let's say your team needs to work with a new Azure service,
but nobody's even heard of it before.
Do a quick round of research on the service
to see if you're comfortable taking on the work.
And if so, offer to take the lead,
In these situations, it can also be good
to if a teammate is willing to partner with you
on solving the problem,
That way, you can divide the work
and have two individuals on the team
familiar with the solution.
In my opinion, these are the best situations to step up
because you'll learn new skills
while solving a major problem for your team.
It's a win-win.
A similar scenario
is when nobody wants to complete a particular task.
Often these are the less glamorous tasks
that might be tedious and a bit mundane.
Sometimes your team members might even think
the work is beneath them,
which is never a great way to approach it.
While you don't want to take on every task of this nature,
your leadership will appreciate your willingness
to step up to the plate when nobody else will.
Great software developers are always looking
for new things to explore,
so they can grow and advance to the next level.
If you take the initiative to help your team in a pinch,
you'll grow tremendously in the process
and get to work with new individuals
across your organization,
which positions you for the next step in your career.
So, always keep on the lookout for these opportunities
because they're career accelerators
that build your skills, resume, and reputation.